Problem Statement:
Can I serve betting companies by provinding a homefield-advantage prediction that is above the baseline accuracy rate?

My first goal was to prove that homefield advantage exists using data for the English Premier League for years 2013-2022. The homefield advantage is hard to pin down, it is a subjective idea, the idea that a team performs better at home. The reasoning is often attirbuted to the home crowd. How would you perform if you had ~60,000 people jeering you, and cheering for you to make a mistake? Furthermore, they are supporting the team you are playing against, hoping that they beat you. 

In addition, I wanted to see if the data showed any effect created by the 2020-2021 season which was during the COVID19 pandemic. During the pandemic, games were played in closed stadiums with no crowd. Since it is hypothesized that the crowd provides, or increases, the effect of the home field advantage, I am hoping that there is a visible anomaly. 

I am trying to improve on a categorical target variable of predicting home undefeatededness (wins+draws) at home, the baseline accuracy is 90% according to Liverpool's current performance in this season and historically. I intended to improve on that prediction, and achieve a model performance above 90% accuracy. I will use several classifying models to attempt this. 

I provided several statistics related to English Premier League soccer home and away data for those years (2013-2022). My statistics show that more wins were achieved at home for all teams across the league. Futhermore, I showed that the first-place team and the last-place team both won more games at home on average, having only won more away games twice between both places over the past 9 years. In addition, I wanted to look at performance by teams at home. I showed that both the first and last place teams scored more goals at home. Again, having only two anomalies between both first and last-place teams in the past 9 years. The two anomalous cases of teams winning more games while playing away compared to home games both occured during times when the league was hit by the COVID19 crisis, years 2020 and 2021. This anomalous shift in away games overtaking home wins occured not only league-wide, but for Liverpool specifically as well.

In my attempts to create a prediction model that would classify future liverpool games as a predicted win, I used Logistic regression, K-Nearest neighbors, Decision tree, Random Forest,  Bagged, Ada Boost, and Support Vector classifier models. They all performed well, but could only approach the same value as the baseline accuracy rate. Some of the models beat it by having a train-score in the high nineties. However, they were fairly over-fit. As I tweaked the hyperperamters to fix the fitting issue, they increasingly reduced back to the baseline accuracy score. This led me to believe that, based off of the match statistics I had found, I would be unable to create a prediction model that improved on the baseline accuracy score. It appears as if more data is needed to make a better prediction than what I had available.

In conclusion, I believe the data did show fairly conclusively that home field advantage does exist and that individual team performances (in terms of goals scored) also increase when playing at home. Also, making models to predict future game outcomes is a lot more complex than it seems.

Sources:
www.soccerstats.com
http://www.football-data.co.uk/